Continuous Integration populated (#115)
cppalliance/site-docs: contributor-guide/modules/ROOT/pages/testing/continuous-integration.adoc

> = Continuous Integration

Reviewer: Cirrus CI (https://cirrus-ci.org/) offers FreeBSD support. Considering its unique capability, could it be worth incorporating into the docs and the Boost continuous integration process?

Author: @fpelliccioni Probably a good question for @alandefreitas  or @anarthal ?

Reviewer 2: Nothing against that. I just haven't seen it being used in other libraries yet.

> The Boost project uses Continuous Integration (CI) to ensure the quality and integrity of its code. CI is the practice of merging all developers' working copies to a shared mainline several times a day. The main aim is to prevent integration problems, which are detected and can be fixed as early as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Boost project utilizes Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) to ensure the quality and integrity of its code. CI/CD is the practice of merging all developers' working copies into a shared mainline several times a day. The primary objective is to prevent integration issues, which can be identified and addressed as soon as possible.
```

Boost uses several CI services for testing on different platforms and compilers. Many libraries use two or three of the systems described here, as does the https://github.com/boostorg/boost/tree/master[Super-project] itself.

> Note:: It is a requirement for a new library submission to Boost to include an appropriate CI system. Refer to the examples for each CI system to better understand what is involved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note:: It is a requirement for a new library submission to Boost to include an appropriate CI/CD system. Refer to the examples for each CI/CD system to better understand what is involved.
```

Author: I am leaving it as CI for now - not sure we use the CD side of these tools as the releases are not updated? Open to correction.

> == New Library CI Framework

Reviewer 3: I think this is missing the Boost-specific details, which are what makes CI testing in Boost difficult in my opinion. Some things that were really hard for me:
* You test with the superproject, cloning it and placing your lib inside. No-one else does this, you normally would consume Boost as a dependency.
* You test with the develop or master branches of the superproject, instead of a stable release.
* The cmake workflows are not trivial and not usual cmake.

I don't think we can expect @PeterTurcan to know these things because they are very Boost specific, as I recall Vinnie said. This is a really nice start for the CI documentation, but I think me, @alandefreitas or any other author should add the nitty-gritty details this is missing.

Author: These seem like valid points to make, so added them. More detail from lib authors can be added in due course.

A recommended process to start a new Boost library is to clone the contents of the https://github.com/boostorg/boost-ci/tree/master[boost-ci] repo. This repo contains the basic CI framework for a new library. Clone it, then adjust and edit it appropriately.

This repository contains scripts that enable CI with:

* <<GitHub Actions>>
* <<Drone>>
* <<Travis CI>>
* <<AppVeyor>>
* <<Codecov.io>>
* <<Azure Pipelines>>
* <<Coverity Scan>>

For step-by-step processes, and tables of supported compilers, refer to the https://github.com/boostorg/boost-ci/blob/master/README.md[boost-ci README.md].

== GitHub Actions

> Boost has been incorporating https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions[GitHub Actions] into its testing workflows. This is a Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) system platform provided directly by GitHub. It can run tests on a variety of platforms and configurations. Here's a basic outline of how GitHub Actions works for Boost:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Boost has been incorporating https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions[GitHub Actions] into its testing workflows. This is a CI/CD system platform provided directly by GitHub. It can run tests on a variety of platforms and configurations. Here's a basic outline of how GitHub Actions works for Boost:
```

Author: done

> Boost has been incorporating https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions[GitHub Actions] into its testing workflows. This is a Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) system platform provided directly by GitHub. It can run tests on a variety of platforms and configurations. Here's a basic outline of how GitHub Actions works for Boost:

Reviewer 3: I'd note the main problem we've got with GHA nowadays - since all builds run under boostorg, we hit the quota and may take a long time

Author: note added

> . GitHub Actions use YAML files stored in a directory called `.github/workflows/` at the root of the repository to define the build environment and steps. For instance, a workflow file might specify which operating systems and compilers to use, any dependencies to install, and the commands to run for building and testing the code.

Author: done

. After the workflow runs, GitHub Actions reports the result. If any step in the workflow fails, the failure is reported, which helps developers to quickly identify and address issues. The status of each workflow run is displayed on the GitHub interface, allowing anyone to quickly check the status of the project.

Boost also uses GitHub Actions support for _matrix builds_ (allowing Boost to run the same build steps on multiple combinations of operating systems, compilers, etc.), caching of dependencies to speed up builds, and the ability to create custom actions.

=== Example GitHub Workflows

Refer to:

* https://github.com/boostorg/align/blob/5ad7df63cd792fbdb801d600b93cad1a432f0151/.github/workflows/ci.yml[Align library ci.yml]
* https://github.com/boostorg/coroutine2/blob/d7e1c1c4abcf8c1e90097279e485edea0b253a80/.github/workflows/ci.yml[Coroutine2 ci.yml]
* https://github.com/boostorg/mp11/blob/ef7608b463298b881bc82eae4f45a4385ed74fca/.github/workflows/ci.yml[Mp11 library ci.yml]
* https://github.com/boostorg/url/blob/f06f595ae760b6626764b8a01e3f8197b4016d6f/.github/workflows/ci.yml[URL library ci.yml] - contains an extensive test matrix

== Drone

> https://docs.drone.io/[Drone] is an open-source CI system built on container technology. Each step in a Drone build usually runs in its own Docker container, allowing it to use any language, tool, or service that can run inside a Docker container. This offers excellent environment consistency and isolation between steps. You can run your Drone pipelines locally on your machine for testing purposes before pushing changes to your repository.

Author: Added a note, and links

Drone can use a simple YAML configuration file, `.drone.yml`, placed at the root of your git repository. However, as pipelines grow in complexity, managing them with YAML can become challenging. This is where `.drone.jsonnet` and .`drone.star` files come in, which are associated with the https://jsonnet.org/[Jsonnet] and https://github.com/bazelbuild/starlark[Starlark] scripting languages respectively. They both serve the purpose of creating more dynamic, reusable, and maintainable pipeline configurations.

* https://jsonnet.org/[Jsonnet] is a data templating language for app configuration. It is a superset of JSON and allows for custom scripting to dynamically produce JSON (and by extension, YAML). With `.drone.jsonnet`, you can create advanced pipeline configurations that aren't feasible with static YAML files.

* https://github.com/bazelbuild/starlark[Starlark] is a Python-inspired language that was created by Google and is used for configuring Bazel build systems. Similar to Jsonnet, it allows you to create more complex and maintainable pipeline configurations.

> Both Jsonnet and Starlark allow you to use logic like conditionals and loops in your configuration files, making them a powerful tool for complex CI/CD pipelines. If your team has Python experience, for example, Starlark's Python-like syntax might be a better choice. If you're working in a JSON-heavy environment, Jsonnet might be more suitable.

Author: changed to singular

Drone also includes support for matrix builds, secrets management (for handling sensitive data), and plugins (for extending functionality).

=== Example .drone.jsonnet Files

Refer to:

* https://github.com/boostorg/smart_ptr/blob/13be03abf880cdb616d0597c38880f53f1b415b8/.drone.jsonnet[Smart Pointer library .drone.jsonnet]

* https://github.com/boostorg/variant2/blob/e2546b70ca04d4263f7a5917815506e488b6920f/.drone.jsonnet[Variant2 library .drone.jsonnet]

* https://github.com/boostorg/unordered/blob/9a7d1d336aaa73ad8e5f7c07bdb81b2e793f8d93/.drone.jsonnet[Unordered library .drone.jsonnet]

=== Example .drone.star Files

Refer to:

* https://github.com/boostorg/exception/blob/b039b4ea18ef752d0c1684b3f715ce493b778060/.drone.star[Exception library .drone.star]

* https://github.com/boostorg/type_traits/blob/89f5011b4a79d91e42735670e39f72cb25c86c72/.drone.star[Type Traits library .drone.star]

* https://github.com/boostorg/yap/blob/ae49bf2744586e6bd6c0cedff4500a58a4386860/.drone.star[Yap library .drone.star]

== Travis CI

> https://docs.travis-ci.com/user/for-beginners/[Travis CI] is used for testing on Linux and macOS environments. It is a hosted, distributed continuous integration service used to build and test software projects hosted at GitHub. Here's the overall process:

Author: Added a note it is not recommended for new libs.

. After the workflow runs, GitHub Actions reports the result. If any step in the workflow fails, the failure is reported, which helps developers to quickly identify and address issues. The status of each workflow run is displayed on the GitHub interface, allowing anyone to quickly check the status of the project.

Boost also uses GitHub Actions support for _matrix builds_ (allowing Boost to run the same build steps on multiple combinations of operating systems, compilers, etc.), caching of dependencies to speed up builds, and the ability to create custom actions.

> === Example GitHub Workflows

Author: OK, removed the super-project examples, added URL library

Refer to:

* https://github.com/boostorg/beast/blob/c316c6bd3571991aeac65f0fc35fca9067bc7906/appveyor.yml[Beast library appveyor.yml]
* https://github.com/boostorg/iostreams/blob/5fe4de84f863964f7573be1146f524886146a5d3/appveyor.yml[IOStreams library appveyor.yml]
* https://github.com/boostorg/mp11/blob/ef7608b463298b881bc82eae4f45a4385ed74fca/appveyor.yml[Mp11 library appveyor.yml]

== CircleCI

> https://circleci.com/developer[CircleCI] is a CI/CD platform that supports a wide range of languages, tools, and services, making it flexible for different testing requirements. It is less commonly used than <<Travis CI>> or <<AppVeyor>>, but is used by the Super-project and a few libraries.

Author: ok

> https://circleci.com/developer[CircleCI] is a CI/CD platform that supports a wide range of languages, tools, and services, making it flexible for different testing requirements. It is less commonly used than <<Travis CI>> or <<AppVeyor>>, but is used by the Super-project and a few libraries.

Author: linked

Refer to:

* https://github.com/boostorg/beast/blob/c316c6bd3571991aeac65f0fc35fca9067bc7906/.circleci/config.yml[Beast library config.yml]
* https://github.com/boostorg/geometry/blob/2ec9d65d1294edb97157b564726fdf56b6ac562f/.circleci/config.yml[Geometry library config.yml]
* https://github.com/boostorg/multiprecision/blob/380aae3c28c646ea2ca1b42156d83732295082d7/.circleci/config.yml[Multiprecision library config.yml]

> == Codecov.io

Reviewer 3: I think coverage deserves its own section, and that we should expand on how to set it up correctly.

Author: Created a coverage section, with a new intro.

Codecov also provides a browser extension that overlays coverage data directly on GitHub, so you can see coverage information as you browse your code. 

=== Example .codecov.yml Files

* https://github.com/boostorg/beast/blob/c316c6bd3571991aeac65f0fc35fca9067bc7906/.codecov.yml[Beast library .codecov.yml]

* https://github.com/boostorg/date_time/blob/85e637cb325208c2af9af791c3a1948b4888c6cd/.codecov.yml[Date-time library .codecov.yml]

* https://github.com/boostorg/json/blob/0a7860fcfce7d66c0abe3d96f666540c00c33f73/.codecov.yml[Json library .codecov.yml]

== Azure Pipelines

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/?view=azure-devops[Azure Pipelines] is a cloud service provided by Microsoft to automatically build, test, and deploy applications. Here's how it generally works:

. Azure Pipelines uses a file named `.azure-pipelines.yml` at the root of the repository to define the build environment and steps. This file specifies the operating systems and compilers to use, any dependencies to install, and the commands to run for building and testing the code.

> . When changes are pushed to the repository, Azure Pipelines automatically initiates a build and runs the tests according to the instructions in `azure-pipelines.yml`. This helps ensure that changes do not break existing functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. When changes are pushed to the repository, Azure Pipelines automatically triggers a build and runs the tests according to the instructions in the `.azure-pipelines.yml` file. This helps ensure that changes do not break existing functionality.
```

Author: done

* https://gcc.gnu.org/[GCC, the GNU Compiler Collection]: While not the default, GCC can also be used on macOS. It's typically installed via a package manager like Homebrew. However, it's worth noting that when you install GCC on a Mac, the default "gcc" command often still points to Clang for compatibility reasons, so you might need to use a version-specific command like "gcc-9" to use the real GCC.

* https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/news/intel-c-compiler-classic-2021-2-1-release.html[Intel Compiler]: The Intel pass:[C++] Compiler is also available on macOS and can produce highly optimized code, especially for parallel computation and vector operations. Like on Linux, it's often used in high-performance computing scenarios.

== Sanitize your Code

Consider using a code sanitizer to check for some of the more mundane, but nevertheless real, bugs and inefficiencies in your library.

All the tools listed have different strengths and are useful in different scenarios, so you might want to use several of them in combination.

=== AddressSanitizer

> https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/sanitizers/asan?view=msvc-170[AddressSanitizer (ASan)] is a fast memory error detector built into LLVM/Clang, gcc and other compilers. As such, it works on Windows, Linux, and MacOS. It can detect out-of-bounds accesses to heap, stack, and globals, use-after-free and use-after-return bugs, and other memory-related errors. AddressSanitizer is generally faster than Valgrind and can be used in continuous integration without significantly slowing down the test suite.

Reviewer 3: I think this needs rework. I'd move this to a separate document.

* You're mentioning clang's ASAN but linking to MSVC's ASAN. I'd just mention clang's. I don't know if we support building with ASAN's MSVC via any of our tools.
* Saying that the four sanitizers are part of the address sanitizer is a little bit confusing. They're just different sanitizers.
* ASAN is enabled by passing the `-fsanitize=address` to clang, or with the `<address-sanitizer>on` B2 flag. Under cmake, you need to add the flags manually. I'd mention leak sanitizer together here, since it runs with asan. The standalone version is for advanced scenarios I'd say, I don't think it's worth mentioning it here. https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AddressSanitizer.html
* I think Boost.CI doesn't include any build for msan does it? I think it's good mentioning here, too. B2 doesn't have a feature for it, so you need to specify `-fsanitize=memory`. https://clang.llvm.org/docs/MemorySanitizer.html
* UBSan `-fsanitize=undefined` or `undefined-sanitizer=on` in B2. https://clang.llvm.org/docs/UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer.html
* TSan `-fsanitize=thread` or `thread-sanitizer=on` in B2. https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ThreadSanitizer.html

Author: OK, moved sanitizers to a separate page.

Author: And added your notes for each santizer.

* https://gcc.gnu.org/[GCC, the GNU Compiler Collection]: While not the default, GCC can also be used on macOS. It's typically installed via a package manager like Homebrew. However, it's worth noting that when you install GCC on a Mac, the default "gcc" command often still points to Clang for compatibility reasons, so you might need to use a version-specific command like "gcc-9" to use the real GCC.

* https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/news/intel-c-compiler-classic-2021-2-1-release.html[Intel Compiler]: The Intel pass:[C++] Compiler is also available on macOS and can produce highly optimized code, especially for parallel computation and vector operations. Like on Linux, it's often used in high-performance computing scenarios.

== Sanitize your Code

Consider using a code sanitizer to check for some of the more mundane, but nevertheless real, bugs and inefficiencies in your library.

All the tools listed have different strengths and are useful in different scenarios, so you might want to use several of them in combination.

> === Valgrind

Author: Moved Valgrind to last.

=== CCache

https://ccache.dev/[CCache] is a compiler cache. It speeds up recompilation of pass:[C++] code by caching previous compilations and reusing them when the same compilation is done again.

Here's a simple example of how to use it in a CI environment:

. In your CI configuration file, add a step to install CCache. This will depend on the specific OS you're using in your CI environment. For Ubuntu or Debian, you can use:
+
[source,txt]
----
sudo apt-get install ccache
----

. You'll need to prepend ccache to your compiler commands to use the cache. In a CMake-based project, you might do something like this in your CI configuration file:
+
[source,txt]
----
export CXX="ccache g++" CC="ccache gcc"
cmake ..
make
----

. You may want to adjust cache settings depending on your project's needs. For instance, you might set `max_size` to control the maximum size of the cache:
+
[source,txt]
----
ccache --max-size=2G
----
+
Or set sloppiness to control what aspects of the build can vary while still using the cache:
+
[source,txt]
----
ccache --set-config=sloppiness=pch_defines,time_macros
----

=== Docker

> https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/[Docker] can be used to potentially reduce CI times, but it's important to understand that Docker isn't inherently a performance-boosting tool. Rather, it provides consistency and isolation for your applications, which indirectly may lead to improved CI times. Here are some ways Docker can help:

Reviewer 2: I think Sam wouldn't agree with that. Although Ruben would be more favorable to docker in CI. I think we need to list the cases where docker is useful.

Reducing CI times is questionable in most simpler libraries. The workflow usually starts with an image and then downloading a few binaries or apt-get or something. Let's say you need GCC11 as a workflow. 

- As apt-get already gives you compiled GCC11 binaries and any binaries in the image also need to be downloaded (no free lunch), you might end up saving nothing. 
- Now consider the case where the github image already contains GCC11. Now you're actually losing a free-lunch, because you have an image with GCC11 and you are using it to download another image with GCC11.
- Then there's the problem of testing multiple compilers. If you have one docker container for each compiler, then this has a high cost. If you have one docker container with all compilers, now you have all workflows downloading all compilers and then just testing one of them, while the github image would already have most of these compilers.

Consistency and isolation are good features of docker more than reducing CI times, but it also has problems. It goes somewhat against the purpose of one of our missions which is to support the most common environments instead of an isolated environment. The scenario where this is useful is more specific and not the general case and that has to be clear in the text. There are basically two scenarios where isolation is very useful. 

- The first is when we are replicating environments we couldn't replicate otherwise. For instance, we need ubuntu 16 all the time but there's no github image for it. So we use the ubuntu 22 image and run a ubuntu 16 docker container on it. This is the most common case by far.
- The second case where it's very useful is when the workflow depends on tools that can't be easily downloaded with apt-get. One example is mrdox, where we need a very specific version of LLVM. The binaries for this version are not available anywhere and building it from source takes hours. So we have a docker container that bundles the LLVM binaries and everything is much easier. But this use case is also a little questionable because we could also store these binaries elsewhere and download them in CI, which would have the same effect. The best use case for docker seems to be really just replicating environments we couldn't replicate otherwise.

* Docker uses layer caching. If you have a Dockerfile that first installs dependencies and then adds your code, Docker will cache the dependencies layer. In subsequent builds, as long as the dependencies don't change, Docker can reuse the cached layer, speeding up the build process.

* Docker allows for easy parallelization of tests. Each test can run in its own container, isolated from the others, and potentially on its own host machine. This can significantly reduce the time it takes to run a large test suite.

* Docker images with pre-installed dependencies can be built and pushed to a Docker registry. These images can then be pulled and used during the CI process, saving time on environment setup.

However, it's worth noting that using Docker can also _add_ overhead to your CI process. Building Docker images and setting up containers can take time, particularly if not managed efficiently. It's important to leverage Docker's layer caching and use efficient Dockerfile strategies to ensure you're not unnecessarily slowing down your CI process.

> Docker is often used in conjunction with <<CircleCI>>.

Reviewer 2: That's a very weird sentence.

Author: reworded
